The call centre was initially designed for remote customer support services using voice telephone for communication. However, as customer needs and technology rapidly changed in recent years, organisations started introducing new business models which in turn caused fundamental changes to their operating models specifically within call centres. Technology such as Artificial Intelligence (AI) is driving these disruptions in unprecedented ways in all industries. AI are computer systems that mimic general intelligence found in human beings. The benefit is that AI brings possibilities which were deemed science fiction barely two decades ago. 

Organisation now require agility to play different roles in the value chain and ecosystems. The call centre as a channel must develop capabilities to create value and deliver new services for the business. The first change is that services that are offered in the branch or shops should also be offered in the call centre. This allows the business to connect with the market and play different roles literally on the fly. An AI-powered call centre which virtually provides all services offered by the business can be referred to as an AI-VSC. 
The AI-VSC delivers omni-channel and intelligent customer experience. Omni-channel functionality allows customers to start a service and move seamlessly across multiple channels namely, physical (branch), virtual (Call centre) and Digital (mobile app) within a single journey without having to restart the engagement process. Similarly, a customer within an AI-VSC comprising of WhatsApp, Mobile App, Web Portal and Voice Call channels can start a service and seamlessly move across channels without restarting from scratch. Intelligent experience means, a system that recommends actions, anticipates and automates key decisions. Such an AI-VSC offers relevant services based on a detailed understanding of customers behaviour and context. The AI-VSC can support customer journeys that start and end on touchpoints outside the company’s proprietary perimeter.
The AI-VSC is capable of delivering personalized messages and decisions to millions of customers. In addition, it should support customer journeys that start and end on touchpoints outside the company’s proprietary perimeter. However, because it may support sensitive business services and ecosystem partner journeys, it should be able to manage the scale, security standards and regulatory requirements of a huge corporate. AI uses data to work 24/7 doing the deep and heavy lifting in support of humans. Productivity improve because AI doesn’t do politics, it’s not forgetful and doesn’t take off-sick. Better still, it trains itself autonomously using work as a teacher. 
AI-powered chatbots which mimic human interactions are deployed as the first point of contact for customers in the AI-VSC. These intelligent chatbots use natural language processing to understand customer queries and provide real-time and personalized responses at-scale. This reduces call centre overhead costs, as digital channels are cheaper than phone calls.
Data constitutes the AI-VCS fundamental raw material for all operations. Without data, there is no AI-VSC. Therefore, Big Data capabilities for three layers, namely, visualisation, analytics and data lake should be provided. Both humans and AI working independently or in collaboration should operate with a single version of truth. 
“The value of a VSC is measured by how much data it uses, not the operations data it provides”,  Rubiem 
An architecture based on cloud computing, microservices and APIs enables the AI-VSC to quickly deploy new services, integrate with third-party platforms and respond to market demands. For AI  to deliver value across the organization, the AI-VSC can have several technologies with a wide range of functionalities. This is a departure from the traditional call centres that use a single out-of-the-box system with IVR as the key functionality.  
AI algorithms can analyse key words, voice tone and language patterns in conservations to depict the customer sentiment. This allows the service consultant to gauge situations and talk appropriately, when engaging with angry customers. AI can automatically escalate the interaction to a supervisor when a strong negative sentiment is detected. Alternatively, the interaction can be automatically escalated to an expert or a suitable department.
One of the legacy automation technology is Interactive Voice Response (IVR). It is based a menu driven voice telephony prompts system. The advent of speech recognition, natural language processing and machine learning transformed IVR systems.  This means IVR system can understand what a customer is trying to communicate based on the context which improves customer experience.  
Customers are generally annoyed by long waiting times or being transferred from one service consultant to another when all they want is quick service. With AI, the customer service request is analysed and intelligently routed to the most suitable service consultant based on expertise, skills, language or interactions history. This reduces service transfers and minimizes customer wait times. The intelligent routing also includes instances where  humans and AI collaborate. 
Predictive analytics and machine learning are used to predict customer needs and preferences, capacity and skills planning. They are used for predictive behavioural routing when choosing a service consultant for instance, the fastest service consultant who has dealt with similar service. This results in service consultants working on what the know best and customers being happy at the same time. 
AI algorithms that analyse the conversation content, topics discussed, identify key points and crucial details can address the transcript generation problem in call centres. A summary including the customer issue, resolutions and required follow-up is produced. In addition, full transcriptions are produced by translating voice chats into written text after each call. The automatically generated summary and transcripts are added to the customer conversation ticket saving time and costs spent on call wrap-ups. 
AI is used for quality control, call monitoring and to obtain insights and even combating fraud. AI analyses call transcripts at scale to identify trends, recurring issues, customer preferences, customer sentiments and gather deep insights. Thorough quality assessments that extract actionable insights, training customisation is produced for the business. Management is able to make data-driven decisions based on key performance indicators (KPIs). 
A pragmatic AI roadmap can be developed such that collaboration between AI and humans is best placed to solve a wide variety of problems which humans can’t tackle with speed on their own. The AI-VSC is intelligent and capable of autonomously learning and making many decisions before escalating to humans. 

