Technology is moving at pace where even straying abreast is a challenge to people, businesses and economies.  There are two things about technology that are unprecedented. Firstly, there is about a dozen technologies which are simultaneously doubling capability every twelve months without increasing price. This is unique in human history because previously, at any point, only one or two technologies were accelerating exponentially. Secondly, for the first-time in history, advanced technologies are cheap. Previously advanced technologies were costly and only government or big corporate could afford. 
These accelerating technologies cause costs to drop significantly and in some cases to zero. Generally, technologies that accelerate rapidly make something which was scarce and to be abundant. As a result, digital business models are designed around abundance and very low prices due to economies of scale. In addition, the accelerating technologies cause disruption everywhere including democracy, education, health, religion, culture and banks are equally affected. 
While this is happening, banks have to deal with disruptive industry changes and regulatory policy requirements. For instance, traditionally the bank business model is centred around creating value from deposits and loans. As such, income from loans which is commonly referred to as funded-income contributed the largest proportion of revenue. However, in recent years, banks in some markets experienced a disruptive shift where the largest revenue contributor became transactions charges, service fees and commissions which are referred to as non-funded income. Therefore, banking regulators introduced policy interventions to protect customers especially in cases where the net bank account balance continuously decreased over time due to bank charges instead of increasing from interest earned. 
Banks therefore find themselves in a difficult situation because firstly, technology disruption allows new types of competitors to enter the market and cherry-pick profitable parts of the business such as payments and credit. These competitors such as Techfins which include mobile money companies operate in the banking space without the cost burden of banking regulations because they are not classified as banks. Secondly, the traditional bank operating model which includes the organisational structure, channels, technology, processes products and services was designed for a funded-income business model which is no longer the case in some markets.  Thirdly, the banks have to navigate economic volatility challenges and comply with regulator policies pronouncements which are very necessary. 
The most dominant accelerating technology is Artificial Intelligence (AI) which is doubling in capability every three months. In practice, AI requires minimum viable levels of digital transformation and data transformation implementation to address the banking business model challenges identified earlier in this article. There are two questions that arise.  Firstly, how does a bank ensure that selected components of its business model can scale up at the same rate at which AI implemented in its technology architecture is accelerating. Or instance, increasing the volume of Point of Sale (POS) transactions made on the bank’s devices. Secondly, how does a bank use AI to create the abundance in its business model? For instance, a customer can pay a monthly fee for unlimited free transactions. Thirdly, how does a bank ensure that some costs decrease at the same rate at which technology costs are exponentially dropping.  
We would like to zoom into how AI can address the impact of banks business models shifting from funded-income to non-funded income. A key point to note is that funded-income is about transactions volumes, internal and third-party services offered by the bank. AI can be used to reduce costs that surround transactions, services and bank staff members. For instance, making all branches hundred percent digital using AI-powered technology achieves this objective. In addition, AI can be used to improve efficiencies through intelligent automation of all process that surround transactions, products, services and people. For instance, a bank can deploy an omni-channel which provides seamless customer journey across the branches, call centre and digital platforms. 
It should be noted that a non-funded income business model is biased towards abundance which entails very low unit costs for everything the bank does. So, digital transformation should be implemented in full to optimise some legacy and costly funded-income operating elements such as organisation structure and processes. All back-office processes in the branch and at head office should be automated. AI can be used so that staff in branches don’t waste time and resources doing repetitive tasks such as manual cash, and ATM reconciliations and preparing reports commonly referred to as returns. AI can be used to automate some time-consuming compliance, risk and audit activities. Some banks still spend lots of time and resource preparing monthly reports for the regulator by cutting and pasting content from their systems to templates prescribed by the regulator. Another low hanging fruit is using AI to automate general ledger reconciliations which is a problematic area for quite a few banks. The bank should identify all heavy plumbing, costly and time-consuming processes in loan origination, onboarding and the call centre and deploy AI to reduce costs. Support functions such as administration, human resources and procurement should be digitised. 
A bank will struggle to run a non-funded income business model without solid data assets. In fact, without data its losing battle due to the need to satisfy the ever-changing customer needs, manager unit costs, customise prices at-scale and comply with regulatory requirements. 
The single most important pre-requisite for banks to thrive with a non-funded income business model is technical leadership, capacity and skills. The bank should have compiste leadership skills generally found in a Chief Technology Officer, Chief Digital Officer and most importantly Chief AI Officer to drive the business. In a non-funded income business model environment, technical leadership that is in love with vendor driven and out-of-the box technology solutions will take the bank nowhere very fast.  Its all about agile bespoke AI and data driven solutions. 
Dr Dennis Magaya is the CEO and Founder of rubiem, He is Chairman of AI Institute Africa. He is reachable on dennis@rubiem.com, +263 71 777 0666

