The demand for banks that only use digital platforms to serve customers is increasing throughout the world. These branchless banks generally referred to as Digital-only banks introduce new business models, products, services and novel customer experience. They leverage fast-changing digital technology and disruptive innovation to deliver substantial cost benefits to customers. As a result, Digital-only banks simultaneously bring new and rapidly changing types of risks compared to traditional banks which use physical branches and risks remain relatively static over a period of time. 
Regulators are chasing a moving target to find the right balance between enabling innovation and protecting consumers. In addition, they have to figure out how Digital-only banks’ licensing can deliver policy strategic goals, such as increasing financial inclusion, promoting competition, improving customer experience and financial sectors efficiency. As a result, the regulatory and supervisory landscape is becoming more complex and changing at a faster pace throughout the world. New approaches and technologies are required for to remain relevant and effective in dispensing their mandate. The Digital-only banks are leveraging Artificial Intelligence (AI) to achieve disruptive growth at near zero marginal costs. AI are computer systems that mimic intelligence generally found in human beings. Financial authorities are also adopting AI to deliver the appropriately matched new generation regulatory and supervisory services. 
The digital-only banks’ business models which are generally AI-powered are still maturing throughout the world.  As a result, regulators are cautious in awarding licenses and there are variations in approaches. However, generally two approaches are emerging which are, digital-specific license or extending a traditional bank license. As a minimum, the license defines the permitted company structure, products, service and physical presence.  
China, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Korea, and the United Arab Emirates offered digital-specific licenses. However, there are degrees of variations in these countries. For Singapore, the deposits the bank can take is limited for a given period of time. China, Hong Kong, and South Korea permit unlimited deposits and a full suite of products from the onset.  India and Australia include low cap on deposits and exclude lending from the allowed activities. Hong Kong does not permit digital banks to require a minimum account balance and China’s digital banks do not take direct cash deposits.
Chinese, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Korea, and the United Arab Emirates used digital-banking licenses to achieve national financial services goals. For instance, Chinese regulators aim to increase customer experience and financial inclusion, especially for underserved or unserved segments, leveraging digital banks’ relatively low-cost base. The digital-specific licenses open markets to new players where traditional banking licenses are limited.  In some countries, technology firms acquire small traditional banks and transform them into Digital-only banks. 
The USA and some European countries, regulate Digital-only banks by extending the traditional bank licenses. The Digital-only bank can be licensed to start with e-payments and then apply fo additional licensing for new services later on.  For example, in the United Kingdom Revolut initially launched with an e-payments license and later received a full bank licence to operate in the European Union. In Brazil, the NuBank obtained a license for retail banking services without a full banking license. In countries where a Digital-only license are not available, FinTech and big technology companies add financial products such as lending or payments to their offerings. However, they don’t take deposits a complete banking product and services suite.  
Regulatory and supervisory authorities are transforming from legacy to digital operating models so they offer appropriate oversight to the diverse and everchanging Digital-only banks’ activities. In some markets, digital transformation has resulted in the emergence of digital central banks that leverage the latest technologies such big data, blockchain, AI, cloud computing and Internet of Things (IoT) to stay ahead of the entire economy. 
A regulatory framework that enables full digital customer onboarding and operations is a key requirement for Digital-only banks. Supervising such banks using traditional and manual methods is time consuming and near impossible. This why some central banks adopt AI to enable real-time and automated analysis of huge volumes of structured and unstructured data that is generated by customer onboarding activities at-scale. In countries where the laws permit, the central banks can be integrated directly to the Digital-only banks so that the raw data is available. Regulating Digital-only banks require oversight on eligibility criteria such as ownership, business plans, risk management, products, customer segment targets, minimum levels of paid-up and risk-based capital and sufficient access to liquidity. In addition ATM coverage and agent networks should be covered. The higher the number of Digital-only banks in a country, the bigger the regulatory and supervisory challenges. This entails a change to data and AI based supervision and compliance systems instead of the legacy periodic and templates driven methods used in some parts of the world.   
Digital-only banks are adopting a diverse range of business models with characteristics that set them apart from traditional banks and incumbent specialized financial services providers. The lower cost base and wider geographical reach make Digital-only banks significantly suitable to deliver modern financial services to the underserved and unserved segments which are prevalent in developing countries. The Digital-only banks have to operate on razor-thin cost base.  A such, they should be integrated to the central banks to enable very cost of compliance to regulations and supervisory requirements. 
Digital-only banks are sometimes owned by companies with wide customer networks or a huge technology base. This is valuable in bringing technical expertise, a large pool of potential customers and financial strength. However, the set-up brings market conduct and consumer protection challenges. Central banks have to implement AI-powered solutions to continuously analysis data in order to identify and make corrective orders on undesirable activities that happen during business operations. These include uncompetitive practices, data privacy weaknesses and deployment of products unsuitable for financial institutions. In fact, cybersecurity, data protection and privacy are inherent risks, especially in markets where customers have inadequate digital financial literacy. 
Customer complaint handling for complex situations is important for Digital-only banks. As such, a limited physical presence may be necessary to serve vulnerable customers. Central banks are therefore investing in technological solutions to enhance data handling capacities and to gather granular data from Digital-only banks. In some cases, it is necessary to monitor Digital-only social media trends and to evaluate their AI products and services. These supervisory technologies easier to implement first in Digital-only and later extend to the remaining supervised institutions.
Regulators are investing in AI technology to cost effectively find the right balance between enabling innovation while safeguarding market stability and consumer protections. They are adapting processes and developing digital capabilities to reflect the complex web of players involved in a Digital-only ecosystems. The supervisor’s oversight remit may include providers of essential services such as telecommunications, insurance, health and securities trading either directly or in cooperation with other authorities. 
