Artificial Intelligence spurs new transformative business models and completely different ways of working and skills that never existed before. Artificial intelligence (AI) are computer systems that mimic intelligence found in human beings. AI can learn from data and produce content indistinguishable from human-created output. People can communicate with computers using natural language thereby removing barriers between humans and machines. In addition, AI can perform some tasks better than humans bringing huge advantages in the labour market.  AI doesn’t sleep, get sick, forget things or do politics. As result, AI strikes fear to workers whose jobs and skills are threatened by this technology which is doubling in capabilities every 3 months. 
Historically, work is looked at from a job-centric perspective. Job descriptions are used to manage resources and tasks execution. However, with AI, work is now managed around outcomes. Tasks that can be executed by either humans or machines depending on the most suitable option to produce desired outcomes.  As an example, since 2019, AI can read comprehension better than humans. It can read and comprehend 75,000 words under one minute which is equivalent to reading a novel. Since 2017, AI can recognize images and patterns better than humans. As a result, AI changed work management from focusing on jobs which are human-centric to outcomes which accommodates machines. 
Traditionally, recruitment focuses on assessing person’s historical job titles, qualifications and experience to do a job. AI disrupted this approach to focus on assessing the candidate’s skills to execute tasks. This brings pressure because skills are changing rapidly. The half-life of skills is now 2years which means every two years, half of the person’s skills become obsolete. As a result, life-long learning ability is more important than experience which could be a liability due to obsolete skills. 
AI causes jobs losses, create new ones, complement existing ones and transform others into different ones. The impact differs depending on job types, industries and countries. The biggest risk in developing countries is the absence of research data on AI impact on jobs. As such policy makers, companies, education institutions, students and workers cannot plan effectively. Trade unions, labour laws and employee contracts are not AI compliant. Meanwhile the AI tsunami continues unabated because, globally 75% of staff use AI at work and 78% bring their own AI tools to work. 
Job losses inevitably occur due to automation especially for routine, repetitive, computational tasks, data analysis and content generation. According to rubiem research, in banking, 70% of front-office jobs will be replaced by AI chatbots and other technologies by 2030. Robotic Process Automation (RPA), the lowest-IQ form of AI can be used for customer onboarding, bank reconciliations and writing reports. AI-based anti-money-laundering, anti-fraud and risk management displaces some jobs. About 37% UK jobs and 47% US jobs, jobs are vulnerable to displacement through automation. AI automates most entry-level jobs as jobs across all industries. Robots will replace people in factories and self-driving cars don’t require drivers. 
The majority of jobs will however be augmented rather than replaced because they are only partially exposed to automation.  This results in AI-Human collaboration so that humans focus on what they do best namely, creativity, strategy, empathy and critical thinking. For example, AI can draft contracts, but may miss nuances better handled by a human. Augmentation means parts of jobs, like data entry and filling out forms disappear.  As technology gets better at being technology, humans can get better at being humans. With augmentation AI does some tasks therefore less workers are required. Employees who fail to acquire skills to collaborate with AI become vulnerable to job losses because they are less productive and have poor performance.
Bank executives use AI to augment decision making and their jobs are not at risk yet. Their job task could include using a spreadsheet, running a business development meeting and dealing with an upset client within an hour. All these activities require different skills and context switching which AI doesn’t provide effectively at the moment. The AI era requires a new style of leadership with bold transformative and inventive thinking on how AI and people collaborate to create new forms of value. 
Job losses from automation has historically been offset by creation of new jobs and this trend will continue with AI.  About 60% of workers today are in Jobs that did not exist in 1940. Technology-driven creation of new positions caused 85% of job growth in last 84 years. There will be a significant increase in jobs required to develop, implement and consume AI.
AI impact varies depending on the country, industry sector and profession. Jobs in knowledge sectors such as professional services, information, engineering, mathematics, communication and financial services are most exposed to AI.  The share of jobs requiring AI compared to other sectors is 2.8 times higher for Financial services, 3 times higher for professional services and 5 times higher for information and communication services.  Occupations such as health care and firefighters demand personalized care, precise physical intervention and high-stakes decision-making in complex situations which AI currently can’t provide. As such, they have lower AI exposure risk. Jobs in countries that are not digitalised have low AI exposure. About 67% of jobs will be exposed to AI automation in developed countries with knowledge-based economies while in developing countries its about 57%.
Banks should take a skills-first approach so that workers remain relevant in the rapidly changing labour market. Globally, about 80% of new jobs will require AI-literate workers by 2030. Firms traditionally relied on university graduates to bridge talent gaps and bring new skills. However, universities cannot produce enough graduates to meet AI industry needs. Therefore, upskilling, reskilling and life-long are important to enable banks to scale AI capabilities. By 2030, 50% of Japanese workforce require new skills while in Europe, 36% of workforce require upskilling.
The combination of labour cost savings, new jobs and a productivity boost for non-displaced workers raises overall labour productivity. AI is projected to increase annual global GDP by 7% and productivity by 5%. The banks which don’t use AI directly or to augment staff will have relatively low productivity.  
AI is a tool that makes human labour more relevant and capable. It offers fundamentally new ways for workers to create and amplify the value they deliver.  AI opens up new opportunities to develop new skills, roles, job grading and staff performance management approaches.  Instead of worrying about AI displacing humans in jobs, the focus should be on creating new industries. We should think about how jobs will be graded and performance managed where for instance 50% of a person’s job tasks are done by AI. AI is changing what it takes for workers to succeed.  Workers who harness AI to augment their jobs are more productive and consequently get better salaries. Currently AI skilled workers have a 25% premium on salaries.  
AI won't replace all humans in the workplace, but humans who can collaborate with AI will replace most humans who can’t. The question is not whether there will be enough jobs in future but whether there will be people with relevant skills for the new AI-driven workplace. 
