In the past two decades, digital and data transformation laid the foundation for disruptive change in social-economic development. This is significant because without a minimum level of digital and data transformation, industrial AI implementation is not possible. Technology is now so disruptive that it shifts boundaries of businesses, products, customers overnight. Financial services and in particular banking are now entirely technology driven. A bank’s biggest risk and existential threat is a weak technology, leadership and skills. 
There is a wide range of technologies that a future bank can use and the combined application of these technologies that bring value. Banks are taking advantage of the immense opportunities that AI brings to transform the full business stack from purpose, ambition, business model and operating model. This article presents the use of AI as a core technology for the future bank. 
The traditional bank’s technology ideal is predictable IT where stability and security are prioritized over speed and agility. The focus is delivery of high performance and secure technology in walled gardens. The systems are designed to sustain linear and vertically integrated business models. IT strategy focuses on proven technology emphasising on standardization and rationalisation. Technology is implemented as vendor driven out-of-the-box systems. Changes are incremental with long planning horizons stretching up to eighteen months such that by that time, customer needs and regulation would have changed. The performance matrices focus on cost per unit, availability and efficiency. This traditional IT approach is a liability in the new generation bank.  “If you don’t focus on data, you don’t have a future-fit bank”, rubiem solutions. 
Data analytics provide real-time insights at-scale which makes technology customer oriented. As a result, the bank isn’t stuck in systems plumbing and making technology the objective rather than business needs. An AI-Digital bank’s technical strategy focuses on cutting-edge technology where speed and agility are prioritised. Changes happen frequently using DevOps models. Any humongous core systems which used to be out-of-the-box are delayered into standalone capabilities deployed independently. The planning horizon is under 12months even for core banking systems. Scrums that deliver minimum viable products are preferred instead of the tradition waterfall approach. Experimentation with consumer-grade technology and data are the norm.   
The enterprise technology architecture is designed using digital-first principles to enable agile and scalable non-linear business models. In addition to financial ratios, the technology business case uses benefits e.g, business model transformation and customer life time value. Two unprecedented things about technology which the bank should leverage are, firstly, there is about a dozen technologies which are simultaneously on a doubling pattern. This is unique in human history because previously only one technology would be accelerating exponentially at any point. Secondly, for the first-time in history, advanced technologies are cheap and sometimes free eg open source code. 
The technologies doubling capabilities every 2.5months include AI and crypto currencies while those in the 6 months window include drones and 3D printing. Specific performance matrices should therefore scale at the same rate as the acceleration of underlying technology. New generation technology should deliver 10 times drop in costs in some areas instead of the usual 10%. For instance, AI execute tasks quicker and at fractionally lower cost than humans. 
Today’s digital customers who are accustomed to cutting-edge consumer-grade technology expect banks to deliver omni-channel technology. This enables customer to start a service and move seamlessly across the physical (branch), virtual (Call centre) and digital (mobile app) without restarting. Since all customers and staff share the same backbone technology and data base, the bank operates on a single version-of-truth on near-real-time basis. The omni-channels uses the AI engine to deliver hyper-individualised process orchestration, intelligent products and User Experience (UX) functionality.  
All services and touch points inside the branch should be 100% digital. Service consultants who provide face-to-face interface are supported by AI co-service consultants. A branch which is completely digital inside significantly improves the because cost to income ratio because a traditional manual and paper driven branch is up 15 times higher than digital self-service.
The AI strategy determines the actual AI engine implemented in a bank. The bank’s AI engine strategy can be developed as follows. Firstly, evaluate how the bank’s strategic goals e.g. growth, customer experience, innovation can be enabled using AI technologies. Secondly determine digital maturity levels and heat map across the technology stack by identifying the areas that require transformation, strategic priorities and investment. Use AI to future-proof the bank’s enterprise architecture as much as possible. Lastly, draft an implementation roadmap that spans business, technology and data. 
Banking is a highly regulated and up to 5% of budgets is allocated to compliance. Cost savings can be achieved if AI is used to automate labour-intensive risk, audit and compliance processes. Robotics Process Automation and AI should be use to deliver intelligent processes for the entire back-office, HR and marketing so that costs drop to insignificant proportions.   
Big Data is the bank’s fundamental raw material. It is instructive to invest in technology for AI-powered data visualisation, analytics and a data lake. Capabilities to access Big data from internal and external sources, ingest it into an enterprise-wide data lake, clean and label the data should be deployed. External data sources include the ecosystem partners, suppliers, the cloud, social media and the internet. 
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) enable controlled access to data, processes, services and technical capabilities both within and outside the bank. Within the bank, APIs reduce the need for silos, increase reusability of technology assets and promote flexibility. Externally, APIs unlock partnerships, new opportunities, and enhance customer experiences. 
There is need for hyper-scalable and intelligent infrastructure which includes automated server provisioning. Preventive maintenance and disaster recovery are automated for constant uptime. A combination of on-premises and cloud-based infrastructure is desirable in high-volume and high-frequency areas such as payments, core banking and customer onboarding.  As a pre-requisite to AI deployment, the bank should implement Data Transformation and Technical Department transformation.
The technical leadership should have world-class digital skills and an acute appreciation of different models to exploit cutting-edge and non-linear technologies such as AI and Big data to benefit of the business. The future bank, therefore has two distinct roles namely, Chief Technology Officer responsible for the heavy plumbing and operations of technology infrastructure and applications. Secondly, either a Chief AI Officer, Chief Data Officer or Chief Digital Officer who runs the stuff that fuels the business. 
As digitisation increases business models become non-linear and cyber-attack risks increase. Banks require advanced security and zero trust systems across the entire technology base which identify, detect, protect, respond and recover against vulnerabilities within applications, operating systems, hardware and networks.
Dr Dennis Magaya is the CEO and Founder of rubiem, He is Chairman of AI Institute Africa. He is reachable on dennis@rubiem.com

