Cybersecurity practitioners face unprecedented challenges in dealing with the rapidly changing technology space. There are more than a dozen technologies simultaneously accelerating creating a combined exponential strain on the required cybersecurity policy, skills and solutions. For instance, Artificial Intelligence (AI), crypto currencies, gene editing and quantum computing are doubling in capabilities every 2.5months, drones every 6 months and sensor technology every 12months. The relentless digital transformation advances in banking since the last decade continues to fuel cyber risks. AI has emerged as the most dominant technology to take banking digital transformation to frontiers never imagined before. While AI provides the best cybersecurity solutions, it also enables the biggest risks in banking. In addition, there are no AI international standards and regulations yet. As a result, managing cybersecurity in an AI environment is a convoluted and rapidly moving target. 
AI disrupted traditional banking cybersecurity skills, tools and policies. For instance, most existing cybersecurity solutions utilise deterministic signatures and statistical filters. A signature is a pattern or identifier used to detect a security threat. This traditional approach delivers effective and inexpensive solutions applicable in most environments. Unfortunately, signatures can only catch indicators of compromise or vulnerabilities that are known before leaving the organisation exposed to new risks. Machine learning (ML), is an AI technology that goes beyond the traditional cyber security methods. ML learns from previous data and automatically develops the capability to identify new dangers. ML can evaluate enormous data volumes from many sources over long periods of time. It detects patterns and abnormalities that signify possible security risk at incredible speed. 
Deep learning (DL) is more advanced than ML and uses multi-layered neural networks which improves cybersecurity systems functionality. DL is applied to tasks such as network traffic analysis, virus identification, and intrusion detection. DL learns without human supervision which makes it possible to discover patterns and relationships in unknown data. 
Natural Language Processing (NLP), is an AI technology that enables humans to communicate with computers using natural language. It can be used to analyse textual data, security logs, incident reports, and threat intelligence feeds. NLP categorizes text into themes, locates key keywords and extract relevant information from unstructured data such as videos, audios and text. NLP can automatically generate security incident reports or extract indications of compromise from huge volumes of text. 
AI automates security procedures and incident response activities, such as quarantining contaminated files, blocking malicious traffic, isolating compromised computers and initiating remediation operations in the case of a virus outbreak or data breach.  AI solutions reduces response times and reduces cyber breaches impact by automating response actions and repetitive processes. AI is used to build and maintain an inventory of the assets and users in the environment. Threat intelligence is obtained by looking externally to identify adversarial activities that are targeting an organization. This provides insights on the types of attack vectors being employed so that additional security controls can be implemented. 
AI enables determining if a combination of actions or sequence of activities should be considered a threat. Anomaly detection and behavioural analysis help businesses spot abnormalities in the behaviour of their systems. By examining past data, user behaviour, unsupervised learning and making predictive analytics, AI-driven anomaly detection systems know what should be the typical behaviour of people, devices, and applications. Some anomalies examples include strange login times, access to private data, or alterations in user behaviour.  AI-driven solutions can evaluate data on security vulnerability, determine how a vulnerability affects an organization's security posture, rank remediation priorities and recommend solutions.
AI is used to detect and categorise malware based on the traits and behaviour of the virus. AI analyse network behaviour, file properties, and code patterns to identify both known malware variants and zero-day threats. For instance, malware AI detection systems pin-point new and emerging threats, categorize them into trojans, worms, and ransomware and develop behavioural profiles or signatures to recognize future similar threats. AI systems can estimate the probability of future security events based on historical data and current threat intelligence. Banks should incorporate AI solutions into security operations centres (SOCs) to augment capabilities to identify, investigate, protect and resolve security incidents. 
AI is a double-edged sword that brings unparalleled benefits in cybersecurity solutions while enabling complex and unprecedented problems. Firstly, currently it is not easy to find staff with both AI and Cyber security skills which creates a problem because both areas require specialisation. Organisations will therefore continue to be exposed until there is an adequate pool of AI cybersecurity staff.  AI solutions are available everywhere such as the internet, mobile phones, self-driving cars and various user devices. This increases the risk of cyber-attacks. 
Secondly, AI is capable of self-training using data after which it can make cybersecurity decisions that can’t be explained by humans even if its beneficial. On the other hand, AI can write software which is a security threat or which was not envisioned before and is vulnerable to cyber threats. Thirdly, the effectiveness of AI depends on the quality and accessibility of data. Poor quality data with anomalies may result in skewed or incorrect predictions. 
Fourthly, cyber attackers may poison input data which causes the AI to learn incorrectly leading to inaccurate predictions, classifications and adversarial attacks. In addition, hackers can take advantage of weaknesses in the decision boundaries of AI models which causes incorrect classification of models. There are also risks of adversaries creating minute perturbations to input data which are unnoticeable to humans but drastically change the model's predictions. AI systems developers should intimately know cybersecurity so that they embed protection within the data and the algorithm. 
AI solutions can have biases due to the training and decision-making data. Biased AI systems can unintentionally discriminate against people on the basis of racial, gender, or socioeconomic background. Unfair targeting or profiling may result from biased threat detection algorithms that flag certain people as a security risk. 
Processing sensitive and personally identifiable information of people is a common application of AI in cybersecurity. AI technologies present hazards to data protection and individual privacy rights.  Ethical problems include algorithmic biases, unauthorized access to personal data, and unintended effects of automated decision-making. Striking a balance between privacy protection and maximum data utilisation is a challenge in industries like banking, justice and healthcare.
The opaque nature of AI algorithms causes problems for cybersecurity accountability and transparency. Since ML and DL can learn autonomously from data, they function as "black boxes," because it is difficult to understand the underlying reasoning behind their decisions. This hinders trust, especially in areas where openness is essential. A variety of legal frameworks, compliance standards, industry-specific rules and data protection laws apply to machine learning applications. However, deploying machine learning models in regulated domains while maintaining compliances is a complex task. A cyber security system only works if it uses a more advanced AI than the threat it is addressing. Quantum computers are more advanced computers that can crack all cybersecurity solutions designed using today’s computers. The combination of  AI and Quantum computing poses the biggest risk to cybersecurity in future. 
